THIS IS THE STORY OF A RIVER
WHICH HAS FORMED A NATION.
BUT ALSO ONE WHICH BROUGHT
IT TO THE BRINK OF DISASTER.
AT OVER THREE AND A HALF
THOUSAND KILOMETERS LONG,
THE MISSISSIPPI FLOWS RIGHT
THROUGH THE HEART OF AMERICA.
IT HAS BROUGHT GREAT
WEALTH TO THE COUNTRY,
MAKING IT THE RICHEST
NATION ON EARTH...
BUT GREAT SUFFERING
AND HARDSHIP, TOO,
MAKING IT IN MANY WAYS
THE MOST IMPOVERISHED.
IT IS ALSO A RIVER
WHICH ROCKED A NATION.
♪
THE BLUES, ROCK AND ROLL, GOSPEL
AND JAZZ; THEY ALL FLOWED
INTO AMERICA ON THE MUDDY
WATERS OF THE MISSISSIPPI
AND OUT AGAIN TO THE
REST OF THE WORLD
AS A REVOLUTION
OF SONG.
STARS, SPANGLES
AND SUFFERING...
THE MISSISSIPPI MADE
AMERICA WHAT IT IS TODAY.
THERE'S NO PLACE IN THE
WORLD LIKE THE MISSISSIPPI.
IT'S A MYSTERIOUS PLACE FULL
OF CONTRASTS AND PARADOX -
NORTH, SOUTH, BLACK,
WHITE, POOR AND RICH -
AND WHERE MUSIC HAS
ALWAYS BEEN PLAYED
EVEN WHEN THERE WAS
VERY LITTLE TO SING ABOUT.
THE STORY AND SONG OF OL'
MAN RIVER COMES THROUGH
IN THE VOICES OF PEOPLE SUCH
AS DAVID "HONEYBOY" EDWARDS
WHO'S THE LAST LIVING
DELTA BLUESMAN;
REVEREND MILLER SMITH WHO
WORKS ALL THE HOURS GOD SENDS
TO FIND SOME HOPE FOR HIS
DIRT-POOR CONGREGATION;
AND ELLIS SMITH, THE OLDEST
SURVIVOR OF THE WORST FLOOD
IN AMERICAN HISTORY.
♪ THE OL' MAN RIVER, HE
JUST KEEPS ROLLING ALONG. ♪
♪
THE MISSISSIPPI BEGINS
ITS JOURNEY IN LAKE ITASCA
AND RUNS SOUTH
FOR 3,700 KILOMETERS
BEFORE REACHING THE
SEA IN THE GULF OF MEXICO.
THIS IS A RIVER WHICH
DOMINATES THE WHOLE
OF THE AMERICAN
LANDSCAPE.
BUT IT'S THE SOUTHERN STRETCH,
ALSO KNOWN AS THE LOWER
MISSISSIPPI, WHICH HAS DOMINATED
AMERICAN CULTURE AND LIFE.
OUR STORY STARTS HERE WHERE
THE PEA GREEN FLOW OF THE OHIO
MERGES WITH THE MUDDIER
WATERS OF THE MISSISSIPPI.
ON THIS CONFLUENCE LIES THE
LITTLE TOWN OF CAIRO (KAY-ROO).
THERE'S NO SIGNPOST OR
FRONTIER FENCE BUT THIS PLACE
MARKS THE BEGINNING OF
THE LOWER MISSISSIPPI
AND ALSO THE BORDER BETWEEN
AMERICA NORTH AND SOUTH.
TODAY CAIRO LOOKS MORE LIKE A
FILM SET FROM AN OLD WESTERN
THAN A PLACE WHERE
PEOPLE LIVE AND WORK;
A MODERN DAY
GHOST TOWN.
IT'S LIKE MANY OTHER PLACES
IN THE AMERICAN SOUTH WHERE
POVERTY IS A KILLER DISEASE
WIPING OUT WHOLE COMMUNITIES.
IN RECENT YEARS, CAIRO'S
MAINLY BLACK POPULATION
HAS SHRUNK FROM 15,000
TO LESS THAN 3,000
LEAVING IT A CITY OF ABANDONED
BUILDINGS AND DEAD HOPES.
THERE'S NO HOSPITAL HERE,
NO PARK, NO RESTAURANT.
DRUGS ARE COMMON
AND DECAY IS DOMINANT.
THIS IS COMMERCIAL AVENUE WHICH
WOULD HAVE BEEN THE MAJOR
COMMERCE CENTER
THROUGHOUT CAIRO'S HISTORY.
IF I COULD TRAVEL BACK IN TIME
I'D LIKE TO SEE IT IN DIFFERENT
DECADES LIKE THE 1880'S AND
90'S WHEN THE RIVERBOATS
WERE PLYING THIS
AREA, INTO THE 30'S
WHEN THE BLUES FIRST
MIGRATED NORTHWARD.
IT HAD TO BE A
MAGNIFICENT MULTICULTURAL,
FUN, EXCITING PLACE.
>>STACE ENGLAND IS A
LOCAL MUSICIAN WHO GREW UP
NOT FAR
FROM CAIRO.
HE'S ALWAYS BEEN
FASCINATED WITH THIS PLACE
AND HAS SPENT
MANY YEARS HERE
RESEARCHING AND WRITING
SONGS ABOUT ITS RICH PAST.
IT'S HARD TO BELIEVE THAT
THIS PLACE USED TO BE ONE OF
THE BUSIEST AND RICHEST
PORTS IN THE COUNTRY.
BUT SOMETHING HAPPENED HERE TO
MAKE CAIRO'S WEALTH DISAPPEAR
IN RECENT YEARS.
THIS BUILDING WAS DUKE'S
BAR WHICH OPENED IN 1933
AND JUST CLOSED A COUPLE OF
YEARS AGO WHICH BROKE MY HEART.
I LOVED THAT PLACE.
THAT WAS MY OFFICE IN
CAIRO DURING MY RESEARCH.
A BAR HERE, FATBOYS, HAS ALWAYS
BEEN A BAR FOR MANY, MANY YEARS
AND CHANGED
HANDS AND NAMES.
THERE WAS A VERY FAMOUS
NEON MAKER HERE IN CAIRO
AND MOST OF THE SIGNS
WERE IN NEON SO IN THE 40'S
YOU WOULD HAVE SEEN THIS
PLACE BLINKING AND LIGHTING UP
LIKE LAS VEGAS AS
YOU WALKED AROUND.
SO IT'S VERY EMOTIONAL FOR
ME TO BE IN A SPOT LIKE THIS
AND HAVE A SENSE
OF THAT HISTORY.
>>STACE BELIEVES THAT CAIRO
SHOULD BE CELEBRATED
AND PRESERVED BECAUSE OF
THE UNIQUE ROLE IT HAS PLAYED
IN AMERICAN HISTORY.
IT WAS HERE IN THIS TOWN,
WHICH MARKED THE START
OF THE AMERICAN NORTH, THAT
BLACK AFRICAN AMERICAN SLAVES
COULD CLAIM
THEIR LIBERTY.
FOR OVER 300 YEARS SLAVES WERE
SOLD TO WHITE MASTERS ALL ALONG
THE MISSISSIPPI BUT THE HARSHEST
CONDITIONS WERE ALWAYS FOUND
IN THE SOUTHERN STATES AND SO
MANY TRIED TO ESCAPE TO CAIRO;
THEIR GATEWAY TO A
BETTER LIFE IN THE NORTH.
IMAGINE YOU'RE A SLAVE IN THE
SOUTH OR RIGHT AFTER THE CIVIL
WAR YOU'RE A FREED SLAVE OR A
SON OF SLAVES, CROSSING INTO
THE NORTH WOULD HAVE BEEN
AN EVER CHANGING LIFE EVENT.
TO FINALLY FIND YOURSELF ON FREE
SOIL AND SAY I'M A MAN NOW.
NOBODY CAN TELL
ME WHAT TO DO.
SO THIS WAS A DRAMATIC
POINT FOR THAT ACTIVITY.
IN FACT EVEN INTO
THE 40'S IN CAIRO
THIS WAS A
DEMARCATION POINT.
IF YOU WERE COMING FROM
THE SOUTH ON A TRAIN CAR,
YOU HAD TO RIDE IN THE
BLACK CAR BUT IN CAIRO
YOU COULD SWITCH AND
RIDE IN THE MIXED RACE CAR.
>>BEFORE THE DAYS
OF MODERN TRANSPORT
FLEEING SLAVES TRAVELED
TO CAIRO VIA A NETWORK
OF SECRET RIVER
ROUTES AND SAFE HOUSES
NICKNAMED THE
"UNDERGROUND RAILROAD".
THEIR JOURNEY WAS FRAUGHT WITH
DANGER AND IF THEY WERE CAUGHT
THEY'D BE SOLD DOWN RIVER,
A NOTION WHICH BECAME
SYNONYMOUS WITH
RECEIVING A DEATH SENTENCE.
THE LUCKY ONES REACHED
CAIRO WHERE THEY WERE
GREETED BY PEOPLE WHO
GAVE THEM HELP AND REFUGE
AND IT IS SAID THAT ONCE
THE SLAVES ARRIVED HERE
THEY FELL TO THEIR KNEES
AND KISSED THE FREE GROUND.
IF YOU STAND ON THE DOCKS IN
CAIRO TODAY YOU'D BE FORGIVEN
FOR THINKING THAT THE TOWN
IS STILL AS BUSY AS EVER.
BUT THERE'S ONE
BIG DIFFERENCE.
THESE DAYS BIGGER SHIPS
MEAN BIGGER FUEL TANKS
AND FEWER
PIT STOPS.
THE RESULT FOR CAIRO
HAS BEEN DEVASTATING.
NOTHING STOPS
HERE ANYMORE.
STACE BELIEVES THAT
NOT ALL IS LOST AND THAT
IF CAIRO COULD CELEBRATE
AND CASH IN ON ITS PAST
THEN MAYBE IT WOULD HAVE
SOME CHANCE OF A FUTURE.
220 KILOMETERS
DOWNSTREAM
THERE'S A PLACE
THAT'S DOING JUST THAT.
ONCE A LITTLE TOWN SMALLER
THAN CAIRO, MEMPHIS GREW
TO BECOME THE CAPITAL
OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER
AND THE MUSIC
MECCA OF AMERICA.
BLUES, SOUL, AND
ROCK AND ROLL.
MEMPHIS HAS IT ALL.
LOCALS CLAIM THAT ALL THIS MUSIC
ORIGINATED HERE BUT THE TRUTH IS
THAT ALL THE NOTES AND
THE RIFFS AND THE RHYTHMS
WERE CARRIED INTO MEMPHIS
BY THE MISSISSIPPI HERSELF;
A BYPRODUCT OF ALL THE
RIVER AND SLAVE TRADES.
♪
MEMPHIS' GOLDEN AGE OF MUSIC
GOES BACK TO THE 1940'S, 50'S,
AND 60S, WHEN MUSICIANS
LIKE ELVIS PRESLEY, BB KING
AND OTIS REDDING MADE
MEMPHIS THEIR HOME
AND WHEN PLACES LIKE STAX AND
SUN RECORDS GAVE STREET KIDS
THE CHANCE TO BECOME
INTERNATIONAL SUPERSTARS.
ITS CREATIVE HUB AT THAT
TIME WAS BEALE STREET
AND TODAY IT'S ONE OF THE
LEADING TOURIST ATTRACTIONS
IN THE STATE
OF TENNESSEE.
BUT LONG BEFORE IT
OPENED ITS DOORS TO VISITORS,
MEMPHIS WAS THE ORIGINAL
WALL STREET OF AMERICA.
DURING THE 1800'S THE CITY
DEVELOPED INTO THE MOST
IMPORTANT TRADING
CENTER IN THE COUNTRY.
ITS STRATEGIC POSITION RIGHT
ON THE BANKS OF THE MISSISSIPPI
ATTRACTED HUGE
INVESTMENT,
MAKING IT THE LARGEST
COTTON CENTER IN THE WORLD
AND THE LARGEST SLAVE
MARKET IN THE MID SOUTH.
KING COTTON, AS IT WAS
KNOWN THEN, WAS A HUGELY
PROFITABLE CASH CROP GROWN ON
THE SOUTHERN PLANTATION FARMS
AND TRADED HERE.
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE TRAVELED TO MEMPHIS
ALONG THE MISSISSIPPI
TO BUY, SELL, AND BE SOLD,
FORMING WHAT WAS IN EFFECT A
HUGE MELTING POT OF CULTURES.
THIS UNIQUE SHARING AND MIXING
OF BLACK AND WHITE EXPERIENCES
ON THE ONE HAND SOWED THE SEEDS
FOR MEMPHIS' RICH MUSICAL LEGACY
BUT ON THE OTHER CREATED A
DEEPLY ROOTED RACIAL INTOLERANCE
WHICH EXPLODED DURING THE
VIOLENT CIVIL RIGHTS PROTESTS
OF THE 1960'S AND 70'S.
THE ASSASINATION OF MARTIN
LUTHER KING AT THE LORRAINE
MOTEL IN MEMPHIS DURING THE
SPRING OF '68 IS SEEN BY MANY
AS THE BEGINNING OF THE END
OF MEMPHIS' GOLDEN ERA.
DURING THE LATE 60'S AND
70'S MUSICIANS STOPPED
COMING TO MEMPHIS,
TRAVELING FURTHER NORTH
TO PLACES LIKE CHICAGO
AND DETROIT INSTEAD.
ALL THE BARS AND JUKE JOINTS ON
BEALE STREET HAD TO CLOSE DOWN,
THE RECORDING STUDIOS
STOPPED RECORDING,
AND THE CITY SEEMED
TO LOSE ITS HEART...
BUT PERHAPS
NOT ITS SOUL.
JUST A STONE'S THROW FROM THE
MISSISSIPPI IS STAX RECORDS.
THIS PLACE USED TO BE ONE OF
THE LARGEST AFRICAN AMERICAN
BUSINESSES IN
THE UNITED STATES
AND AN OASIS OF BLACK
AND WHITE INTEGRATION.
STAX WAS ALWAYS A PLACE
WHERE THE COLOR OF YOUR MUSIC
WAS FAR MORE IMPORTANT
THAN THE COLOR OF YOUR SKIN.
FOR THOSE OF YOU THAT
DON'T KNOW THIS LADY, SHE IS,
I CONSIDER, THE
MOTHER OF STAX.
LET'S GIVE A BIG HAND
TO MS. DEANIE PARKER.
I WAS WITH STAX RECORDS FROM
ABOUT 1961 WHEN I CAME IN
TO BE A SUPERSTAR AND I REALIZED
THAT I DIDN'T HAVE THE SOULFUL
DELIVERY OF ARETHA FRANKLIN
AND I WASN'T NEARLY AS TALENTED
AS GLADYS KNIGHT, AND MY
LEGS WERE NEVER GOING TO BE
AS LONG AND AS GORGEOUS AS
TINA TURNER'S AND SO I DECIDED
THAT I HAD TO DO SOMETHING
THAT WOULD PUT ME
BEHIND THE DESK WHERE
IT REALLY DIDN'T MATTER.
>>WHEN STAX WAS FORCED
INTO LIQUIDATION IN 1976,
FORMER STAX SECRETARY,
DEANIE PARKER,
REFUSED TO
GIVE UP HOPE.
SHE GREW UP ON THE TOUGH
STREETS OF MEMPHIS AND SO KNOWS
BETTER THAN MOST HOW IMPORTANT
IT IS TO HOLD ON TO THE DREAM.
OVER THE PAST FEW YEARS SHE HAS
BEEN INSTRUMENTAL IN REBUILDING
STAX, NOT AS A RECORDING
STUDIO BUT AS A MUSIC ACADEMY
WHICH ONCE AGAIN GIVES STREET
KIDS THE CHANCE TO SHINE.
IT'S UNFORTUNATE THAT FOR THE
LAST 15 YEARS CHILDREN HAVE
THOUGHT THEY WERE LISTENING TO
MUSIC WHEN IN FACT THEY WEREN'T.
WHAT THEY WERE LISTENING
TO WAS RHYTHM AND RHYME,
ALSO KNOWN AS HIP HOP,
AND THAT GOD-AWFUL RAP.
AND SO THEY'VE JUST
NOT HAD THE EXPOSURE,
THEY'VE NOT HAD
THE ENCOURAGEMENT,
THEY'VE NOT
HAD THE TRAINING
BECAUSE WE'RE DETERMINED
TO DO FOR CHILDREN TODAY
AND CHILDREN IN THE FUTURE
WHAT STAX RECORDS DID FOR US.
>>BUT MUCH LIKE IT WAS IN
THE 60'S, STAX IS JUST AN OASIS
WITHIN A MUCH
HARSHER ENVIRONMENT.
ON THE STREETS OUTSIDE STAX,
THE AFRICAN AMERICAN COMMUNITY
IS STILL STRUGGLING WITH
ENDEMIC RACISM IN A CITY
WHICH IS CONSIDERED THE
MOST VIOLENT IN AMERICA.
♪
APART FROM ITS ROLE AS THE
SUPPORT ACT TO SOME OF THE
BEST MUSIC IN THE WORLD, THE
MISSISSIPPI'S CLAIM TO FAME
IS THAT IT'S THE
WORLD'S FLATTEST RIVER
WHERE WATER
SKIING WAS INVENTED
AND WHERE EARLY
RIVER TRADE AND TRAFFIC
MADE IT THE FIRST SUPER
HIGHWAY OF THE NEW WORLD.
BECAUSE IT'S SO WIDE OPEN AND
EVEN, TRAVELING UP AND DOWN
THE MISSISSIPPI IS PLAIN
SAILING FOR THESE TUG BOATS
WHICH CAN STRETCH UP
TO A MILE LONG AND CARRY
THE SAME AMOUNT OF FREIGHT
AS A THOUSAND RAILROAD CARS.
THESE ARE THE POWER HORSES OF
THE MISSISSIPPI AND THEY'RE A
VERY DIFFERENT ANIMAL TO
THE ELEGANT VESSELS OF OLD.
THE MISSISSIPPI PADDLE
STEAMERS ARE AS FAMOUS
AS THE RIVER ITSELF, EVOKING
A NOSTALGIC SENSE OF ROMANCE
AND CAREFREE ADVENTURE.
ON THESE DECKS
200 YEARS AGO
THERE WOULD BE A
VERY DIFFERENT CROWD.
THERE'D BE SASSY WOMEN RUBBING
SKIRTS WITH CIGAR-SMOKING MEN,
AND RUGGED RIVERBOAT
CAPTAINS KEEPING A LOOKOUT
FOR ANY MISSISSIPPI
ROGUES OR PIRATES.
ALRIGHT. SEE THAT
BIG SANDBAR THERE?
QUIT LOOKING THAT WAY.
THIS LADY KEEPS LOOKING
THAT WAY. QUIT IT.
>>DON LANCASTER HAS
BEEN A RIVERBOAT PILOT
FOR OVER 30 YEARS.
AS A YOUNG MAN HE WORKED AS A
POLICE OFFICER PATROLLING THE
MEAN STREETS OF MEMPHIS
BUT ALWAYS FANCIED HIMSELF
AS THE ROMANTIC LEAD IN AN
EPIC RIVERBOAT ADVENTURE.
I THINK I'VE LIVED MOST
OF MY LIFE ON THE RIVER.
I THOROUGHLY
ENJOY IT.
I DO IT SIX DAYS A WEEK,
SOMETIMES AS MANY AS
FIVE TRIPS A DAY.
SOME PEOPLE LIKE RACING,
SOME PEOPLE LIKE FLYING,
I LOVE THE RIVER AND THAT'S
WHERE I SPEND MOST OF MY TIME.
>>DON BEGAN HIS TRAINING
IN THE PARLOR HOUSES
OF THE GREAT STEAMERS AND
WORKED HIS WAY UP TO CAPTAIN.
HE NOW RUNS DAY TRIPS
FOR SUNDAY SAILORS
WHO SEEM MORE INTERESTED
IN TAKING IT EASY
THAN IN TEARING
UP THE MISSISSIPPI.
AT ONE TIME MY YOUNGEST
SON WAS THE YOUNGEST PILOT
ON THE MISSISSIPPI
RIVER.
WE USED TO
HAVE A LOT OF FUN.
WE WORKED FOR A COMPANY
THAT HAD TWO PADDLE WHEELERS
AND WE'D GET OUT THERE AND
WE'D LOAD IN THE PASSENGERS
AND THEN WE'D CHALLENGE
EACH OTHER TO A RACE.
EVERYBODY
JUST HAD A FIT.
"OH, WE'RE RACING!"
AND SURE ENOUGH WE'D
GO BY DOWNTOWN MEMPHIS
WIDE OPEN WITH THE
PADDLE WHEELS FLYING.
I ALWAYS WON, THOUGH.
YOU SEE, I TAUGHT HIM EVERYTHING
HE KNEW BUT I DIDN'T TEACH HIM
EVERYTHING I KNEW AND WE
USED TO HAVE A LOT OF FUN.
>>MARK TWAIN WAS
ALSO A RIVERBOAT PILOT
AND ONE OF AMERICA'S
MOST FAMOUS AUTHORS.
HE WROTE ABOUT THE ORIGINAL
STEAMBOAT RACES AND ABOUT
ALL THE GAMBLING AND DODGY
DEALS WHICH HAPPENED HERE
BEFORE GAMING WAS
OUTLAWED IN 1870.
IN THE LAWLESS DAYS BEFORE
THE BIG EXPANSION INTO THE
WILD WEST, THE MISSISSIPPI
WAS AMERICA'S LAST FRONTIER
WITH ITS BOATS BECOMING
A POPULAR HANGOUT
AND HIDEOUT FOR ALL SORTS
OF COWBOYS AND CHANCERS.
IN THOSE DAYS THERE WOULD
BE MUSIC TO ACCOMPANY
ALL THE ACTION AND LEGEND HAS
IT THAT JAZZ WAS INVENTED ON A
MISSISSIPPI PADDLE STEAMER BY
AN ITINERANT MUSICIAN CALLED
JAZBO BROWN WHO GAVE HIS
NAME TO THIS STYLE OF PLAYING.
THEY SAY THAT SOME PARTS OF THE
RIVER HAVE NOT CHANGED MUCH
SINCE TWAIN AND JAZBO'S
TIME BUT LIFE ON THE RIVER
HAS CERTAINLY BEGUN
TO ALTER ITS COURSE.
THIS USED TO BE A COMPLETELY
RURAL FARMING AREA RUN BY
A FEW WEALTHY WHITE FAMILIES
WHO MADE THEIR FORTUNES
BY GROWING COTTON
AND USING SLAVE LABOR.
BUT IT'S NOW CHANGING WITH
BIG CORPORATE FARMS MOVING IN
AND WITH STRIP MALLS, MOTELS,
AND BURGER BARS APPEARING
WHERE THERE USED TO BE SHOTGUN
SHACKS AND JUKE JOINTS.
UP UNTIL 10 YEARS AGO
TUNICA WAS JUST ABOUT
THE POOREST TOWN
IN THE COUNTRY.
IT USED TO BE CALLED AMERICA'S
ZIMBABWE BECAUSE OF ITS HARSH
THIRD WORLD LIVING CONDITIONS
BUT NOW IT HAS HIT THE JACKPOT
THANKS TO SOME OF THE
STRANGEST LOOKING BOATS
EVER TO TAKE
TO THE RIVER.
WHEN TENNESSEE LEGALIZED
GAMBLING IN THE 1990'S
IT STATED THAT ALL ACTIVITY MUST
TAKE PLACE ON THE MISSISSIPPI
AND SO TUNICA, LYING A FEW
MILES AWAY FROM THE RIVER,
DIVERTED SOME OF
THE MISSISSIPPI'S FLOW
TO CREATE SMALL POOLS
ON WHICH THEY COULD
FLOAT THEIR MODERN DAY
PLEASURE PALACES.
THEY DON'T LOOK LIKE BOATS AND
YOU CAN'T EVEN SEE THE WATER,
BUT IT IS THERE, UNDERNEATH
ALL THE FLASHING LIGHTS AND
SPINNING WHEELS AND IT'S
ALLOWED TUNICA TO BECOME
THE THIRD LARGEST GAMING
REGION IN THE UNITED STATES.
THE WORLD POKER CHAMPIONSHIP
HAS BEEN HELD HERE
WITH $10,000 SET AS
THE MINIMUM BUY-IN.
FORTUNES HAVE BEEN MADE AND
LOST BUT THE BIGGEST WINNER
IS TUNICA ITSELF WITH THE
CASINOS NOW PROVIDING
WORK FOR 10,000 PEOPLE
AND GENERATING ENOUGH
TAX REVENUE TO
PROVIDE BETTER SCHOOLS,
BETTER ROADS, AND A
BETTER QUALITY OF LIFE.
WHAT EFFECT ALL THIS GLITZY
THEME PARKED WEALTH WILL HAVE
ON THE CULTURE AND
MUSIC OF THE MISSISSIPPI,
WE'LL HAVE TO
WAIT AND SEE.
ONE THING IS CERTAIN... TUNICA'S
OVERNIGHT SUCCESS STORY
SEEMS TO BE THE
EXCEPTION, NOT THE RULE.
AS THE RIVER SEEPS DEEPER INTO
THE SOUTH AND INTO THE FAMOUS
REGION KNOWN AS THE MISSISSIPPI
DELTA WHAT WE WILL SEE IS A
PLACE THAT MAY NO LONGER BE
BOUND BY SLAVERY BUT IS STILL
TODAY BOUND BY THE CHAINS
OF MODERN DAY POVERTY.
WE'LL ALSO CATCH GLIMPSES
OF ITS COTTON RICH PAST,
THE MANSIONS
AND VAST ESTATES
AND SEE HOW THEY SIT NOW
IN THE 21ST CENTURY SOUTH.
♪
THE DELTA WAS FORMED
OVER THOUSANDS OF YEARS
AS THE MISSISSIPPI
FLOODED AND RECEDED
LEAVING BEHIND IT A
RICH, SILTY DEPOSIT
WHICH FORMED SOME OF
THE BEST SOIL IN THE WORLD.
THIS GIFT OF THE MISSISSIPPI
ALLOWED THE DELTA
TO DEVELOP INTO THE MOST
PRODUCTIVE AND RICHEST
COTTON GROWING
CENTER IN AMERICA.
THE DOLLAR WEALTH FROM THIS
LAND AND ITS COTTON PLANTATIONS
WAS ALWAYS ENJOYED BY A
MINORITY OF LOCAL WHITE MASTERS
BUT ITS RICH
CULTURAL HERITAGE
FOUND ITS WAY TO THE
REST OF THE WORLD.
RIGHT IN THE HEART OF
THE MISSISSIPPI DELTA
LIES THE
HOBSON PLANTATION.
IT'S STILL A WORKING FARM
WHICH HAS BEEN OWNED
BY THE SAME FAMILY
FOR NEARLY 150 YEARS.
BUT LIFE ISN'T EASY HERE
EVEN FOR THE ONCE WEALTHY
WHITE POPULATION.
EVER SINCE THE DEMAND
FOR COTTON DECREASED
WITH CHEAPER CROPS BEING
PRODUCED ELSEWHERE
IN THE WORLD, HOBSON'S
HAS HAD TO DIVERSIFY
AND IS NOW A STRUGGLING
TOURIST ATTRACTION
AS WELL AS A
STRUGGLING FARM.
DAVID "HONEYBOY" EDWARDS
REMEMBERS THIS PLACE
WHEN IT WAS A BUSY
PLANTATION, WITH HIS FAMILY
ALONG WITH MANY OTHERS DOING
ALL THE COTTON PICKING WORK.
AT 92, HONEYBOY IS THE
LAST LIVING DELTA BLUESMAN
AND THE TRUE EMBODIMENT
OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER
AND ITS CULTURE.
HONEYBOY WAS PART OF A
SUBCULTURE OF BLUES ARTISTS
WHO WERE REFUGEES FROM
THE PLANTATION SYSTEM.
THESE MEN LIVED
ON THE WILD SIDE
BUT THEIR SONGS CAME
OUT OF PAIN AND SUFFERING.
IN THE BACK BREAKING,
HOT, SWELTERING DAYS
THEY WOULD COMMUNICATE
WITH EACH OTHER BY CALLING
AND ANSWERING IN
RHYME AND SONG.
>>HONEYBOY GREW
UP WITH THE BLUES.
HE WAS BORN IN THESE FIELDS,
THE GRANDSON OF A SLAVE
AND THE SON OF
A SHARECROPPER.
SHARECROPPING WAS
A TENANCY AGREEMENT
WHICH ALLOWED FORMER
SLAVES TO RENT OUT
A THIN STRIP OF LAND
AND WORK IT THEMSELVES,
BUT IN EFFECT IT BOUND
THE BLACK WORKERS
EVER MORE CLOSELY
TO THEIR MASTERS.
THE SHARECROPPERS HAD
TO GIVE HALF THEIR CROP
TO THE PLANTATION
OWNERS AND PAY BACK
NEARLY ALL THEIR
PROFITS IN RENT.
THEY ENDED UP OWING MONEY
AND SO WERE KEPT IN CHAINS
AS EFFECTIVELY AS THEY
EVER HAD BEEN AS SLAVES.
>>HONEYBOY KNEW HE
HAD TO GET OUT SOMEHOW
AND SO ON HIS 17TH BIRTHDAY
HE PICKED UP HIS GUITAR,
KISSED HIS MAMA ON
THE CHEEK, AND WENT OUT
TO FOLLOW HIS DREAM
OF BECOMING A BLUESMAN.
EVER SINCE SLAVES TRAVELED
UPSTREAM TO THE FREEDOM
OF THE NORTH, AFRICAN
AMERICANS ALWAYS CHOSE TO
FOLLOW THE RIVER ROUTE
WHENEVER THEY WENT TRAVELING.
HONEYBOY DID THE SAME, KNOWING
THAT THE BLACK COMMUNITIES
WHICH HAD SETTLED ALONG
THE BANKS OF THE MISSISSIPPI
WOULD PROVIDE HIM WITH
A SAFE HAVEN AFTER DARK.
♪
TODAY, HONEYBOY IS STILL
TRAVELING UP AND DOWN
THE MISSISSIPPI, PLAYING
HIS BLUES TO DELTA FOLK
AND IS STILL ENJOYING HIS
ROCK AND ROLL LIFESTYLE
WITH WOMEN
DANCING AT HIS FEET.
COTTON IS STILL GROWN IN THESE
FIELDS BUT MOST OF THE FARMS
ARE NOW RUN BY BIG
CORPORATE ORGANIZATIONS
AND THE MANSIONS HAVE BEEN
BOUGHT UP BY RICH BUSINESSMEN
WHO FANCIED A HOLIDAY
HOME IN THE SOUTH.
MACHINES DO MOST OF THE
HARVESTING WORK WITH MANY
DELTA DWELLERS HAVING TO MOVE
OUT TO FIND JOBS ELSEWHERE.
FOR THOSE THAT REMAIN,
IT STILL SEEMS THAT
IT'S THE AFRICAN AMERICANS
THAT DO THE HARD WORK
WHILE WHITE
MANAGERS LOOK ON.
OVER THE YEARS MANY PEOPLE
HAVE REAPED THE REWARDS
THAT THE MISSISSIPPI
HAS BROUGHT -
THE RICH SOIL, THE TRADE,
THE DIVERSE CULTURE.
BUT ALL THIS IS JUST
PART OF THE STORY.
THERE'S ALSO A VERY
DARK UNDERCURRENT
THAT FLOWS THROUGH
THESE WATERS.
THIS IS AN AWESOME
RIVER WHICH CAN CAUSE
DEATH AND DESTRUCTION
ON A MASSIVE SCALE.
WHEN HURRICANE KATRINA
HIT NEW ORLEANS IN 2005
THE WORLD REALIZED THE
FULL EXTENT OF ITS FORCE.
BUT IT WAS ONLY AFTER
THE WATERS HAD RECEDED
THAT THE REAL TRUTH
FINALLY SURFACED.
THE FLOOD WAS NOT JUST AN ACT OF
GOD, IT WAS A MAN-MADE DISASTER
WHICH SHOULD
HAVE BEEN AVERTED.
A SYSTEM OF LEVEES OSTENSIBLY
BUILT TO PROTECT THE POPULATION
HAD ACTUALLY PUT THEM IN
THE GRAVEST OF DANGER.
A LESSON WHICH SHOULD HAVE
BEEN LEARNED FROM THE PAST
BECAUSE ALL THIS AND WORSE
HAD HAPPENED BEFORE.
IN 1927, A MASSIVE
FLOOD ENGULFED
THE WHOLE LOWER
MISSISSIPPI REGION
WITH ITS EPICENTER IN THE LITTLE
DELTA TOWN OF GREENVILLE.
FROM CAIRO TO NEW ORLEANS,
70,000 SQUARE KILOMETERS
BECAME COVERED IN UP
TO 15 METERS OF WATER,
WITH HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS
OF PEOPLE LOSING THEIR HOMES,
THEIR LAND,
AND THEIR LIVES.
TWO OF THOSE WHO
SURVIVED THE FLOOD
ARE KATHERINE
AND ELLIS SMITH.
THE MISSISSIPPI
HAS NO PREJUDICE,
IT DISPLACED AND KILLED
BLACK AND WHITE ALIKE.
ELLIS AND HIS FAMILY WERE
POOR SUBSISTENCE FARMERS
WHO HAD WORKED THIS
LAND FOR GENERATIONS.
LIVING ON THE OUTSKIRTS OF
GREENVILLE RIGHT IN THE HEART
OF THE DELTA, THEY WERE USED TO
THE FLOODS, GRATEFUL TO THEM,
IN FACT, FOR IRRIGATING THEIR
CROPS AND RENEWING THEIR SOIL.
BUT THAT FATEFUL
WINTER THE RAINS CAME
IN BIBLICAL PROPORTIONS.
THEY FELL FROM THE SKY
LIKE CRASHING WAVES
BEATING DOWN ON
THOSE MOST VULNERABLE.
THE RICH TOWNSFOLK
AND PLANTATION OWNERS
HAD THE MEANS TO MOVE
AWAY TO HIGHER GROUND
BUT THE POOR
WERE LEFT BEHIND
AS THE RAIN FELL
AND THE RIVER ROSE.
>>KATHERINE SMITH
LIVED ON HIGHER GROUND
AWAY FROM
THE LEVEES.
AS A YOUNG GIRL OF SIX, SHE
WATCHED IN HORROR AS WHOLE
FAMILIES SCRAMBLED TO FIND
ANYTHING THAT WOULD FLOAT.
MY MOTHER HAD A FRIEND WHO
HAD THREE OR FOUR CHILDREN
AND THEY WERE TRYING TO
MOVE TO ANOTHER PLACE
THAT WAS HIGHER
AND IN THE MOVE
ONE OF HER CHILDREN FELL
IN THE RIVER AND DROWNED.
THEY COULDN'T GET HIM.
IT WAS JUST TERRIBLE.
I REMEMBER HOW AWFUL I
FELT ABOUT THAT, YOU KNOW.
I COULDN'T UNDERSTAND
IT BUT THEY LOST HIM.
>>THE MISSISSIPPI HAS FLOODED
THESE LANDS FOR THOUSANDS
OF YEARS, BUT IN THE PAST
EXCESS WATER SIMPLY GOT
SOAKED UP BY THE RIVER'S
NATURAL FLOOD PLAIN.
FROM THE 1800'S, HOWEVER,
MAN DECIDED THAT HE WANTED
TO CONTROL THE RIVER AND SO
FLOOD DEFENSES, OR LEVEES,
WERE BUILT BY THE ARMY
CORPS OF ENGINEERS
TO CONFINE THE MISSISSIPPI
IN A NARROW CHANNEL.
THESE SOLID BANKS OF
EARTH WERE DESIGNED TO
PREVENT FUTURE FLOODING,
BUT JUST TWO MONTHS AFTER
THE FLOOD SYSTEM WAS
COMPLETED, THE RISING WATERS,
FORCED INTO A NARROW
CHANNEL BY THE LEVEES,
TURNED THE MISSISSIPPI
INTO A VOLCANO OF A RIVER
WHICH ERUPTED ONTO THE
LAND LIKE AN ANGRY SEA.
AS THE WATERS GRADUALLY
SUBSIDED AND THE POOR
AND DESTITUTE MADE THEIR WAY
BACK TO FIND THEIR FAMILIES
AND REBUILD THEIR BROKEN
LIVES, IT WAS CLEAR TO ALL
THAT THE MISSISSIPPI
WAS NOT TO BE ENSLAVED.
IF MAN WAS FOOLISH ENOUGH
TO TRY AND CONTROL NATURE,
OL' MAN RIVER WOULD
ALWAYS, SOMETIMES VIOLENTLY,
BREAK FREE
OF HIS CHAINS.
BUT SOME LESSONS
ARE NEVER LEARNED.
ONE OF THE MAJOR STRUCTURES
ALONG THE LOWER MISSISSIPPI
IS THE OLD RIVER CONTROL
WHICH WAS COMPLETED IN 1963.
TO ITS EAST IS THE
STATE OF MISSISSIPPI
AND TO THE WEST
LOUISIANA.
FOR 100 YEARS OR SO, THE
MISSISSIPPI HAD BEEN DIVERTING
MORE AND MORE OF ITS FLOW TO A
SMALLER DISTRIBUTORY CHANNEL.
BUT THE ARMY CORPS OF
ENGINEERS WARNED THAT
IF THIS PROCESS WERE
ALLOWED TO CONTINUE
THEN IT WOULD HAVE MAJOR
ECONOMIC REPERCUSSIONS
FOR THE
WHOLE COUNTRY.
ALL THE HEAVY INDUSTRIES
ALONG THE LOWER MISSISSIPPI
USE HUGE AMOUNTS OF
WATER IN THEIR PRODUCTION.
IF THEY LOST THEIR SUPPLY
THEY'D LOSE THEIR BUSINESS,
AND SO THE OLD RIVER
CONTROL WAS BUILT WITH GIANT
FLOOD GATES THAT COULD BE
OPENED AND CLOSED AS NEEDED
IN ORDER TO ENSURE THAT THE
MISSISSIPPI STAYED ON TRACK.
THE ATCHAFALAYA RIVER IS
THE COURSE IT WOULD HAVE
TAKEN TODAY IF MAN
HAD NOT INTERFERED.
THIS SMALL DISTRIBUTORY
CHANNEL OF THE MISSISSIPPI
FLOWS OUT OF THE DELTA AND
INTO THE STATE OF LOUISIANA,
ONE OF THE MOST CULTURALLY
DIVERSE REGIONS IN AMERICA.
BUT LIKE THE DELTA, ALSO
ONE OF ITS POOREST.
THERE ARE 37 MILLION POOR
HIDDEN IN THE LAND OF PLENTY
AND MOST OF THEM
LIVE IN THE SOUTH.
MANY FAMILIES HERE SURVIVE
ON EXTREMELY LOW WAGES
WITH A QUARTER OF ALL
LOUISIANA'S CHILDREN
LIVING IN
ABJECT POVERTY.
IN A PLACE LIKE THIS WHERE
SALVATION IS IN SHORT SUPPLY,
HOPE HAS TO COME FROM
SOMEWHERE ON HIGH.
♪ TAKE ME TO THE WATERS ♪
♪ TAKE ME TO THE WATERS
TO BE BAPTIZED ♪
>>GOSPEL HAS ALWAYS BEEN THE
SISTER MUSIC TO DELTA BLUES.
SOME SAY THE BLUES IS JUST
GOSPEL WITHOUT THE GOD FACTOR.
BUT WHILST BLUES SONGS DESCRIBE
THE HARDSHIP AND ITS REAL
CONSEQUENCES, GOSPEL TENDS TO
USE THE STORY OF DEPRIVATION AND
SUFFERING AND TURN IT INTO ONE
OF EMPOWERMENT AND SALVATION,
OFTEN USING THE
MISSISSIPPI AS A METAPHOR
FOR WASHING
AWAY THE PAIN.
♪ I ONCE WAS LOST
BUT NOW I'M FOUND... ♪
LET US GO INTO
THE HOUSE OF GOD.
ARE YOU ALL GLAD
TO BE HERE TODAY?
I'M SO HAPPY BY
JUST BEING...
>>REVEREND NOAH SMITH IS THE
PASTOR OF A SMALL CHURCH ON
ONE OF THE MISSISSIPPI BASIN'S
LITTLE RIVERS, OR BAYOUS.
GOSPEL MUSIC WAS BORN OUT OF A
CONDITION AND SPEAKING FROM A
BLACK PERSPECTIVE, THEY WENT
THROUGH SO MUCH AND THEY HAD TO
GET SOMETHING TO TRY TO COMFORT
THEM AT THAT PARTICULAR TIME
SO THEY WOULD SING
SONGS BASED UPON
WHAT THE SITUATION
WAS AND THEIR NEED.
AND THEY WOULD FIND HOPE,
THEY WOULD FIND PEACE,
THEY WOULD FIND STRENGTH.
THEY WOULD FIND POWER.
THEY WOULD FIND JOY AND
THEY WOULD GET SONGS
THAT DEAL WITH THEIR
SITUATION TO RISE ABOVE IT
SO THEY COULD BE ABLE
TO STILL PRAISE GOD.
>>DURING SLAVERY, AFRICAN
AMERICANS WERE FORCED
TO ABANDON THEIR OWN FAITHS
AND ORDERED TO ADOPT
THEIR WHITE
MASTER'S RELIGION.
INITIALLY A TOOL OF OPPRESSION,
CHRISTIANITY CAME TO BE
EMBRACED BY THE AFRICAN
AMERICAN COMMUNITY
WITH THE BAPTIST FAITH
GROWING TO BECOME
PARTICULARLY PREVALENT
IN THE DEEP SOUTH TODAY.
DOWN BY THE RIVERSIDE,
DOWN BY THE RIVERSIDE
WON'T STUDY WAR NO MORE.
YOU FOLLOW ME?
BECAUSE ONCE I GET DOWN TO
THE RIVER, I KNOW THAT ALL OF
THE TROUBLE THAT I MAY HAVE
EXPERIENCED IS ALL OVER THEN
BECAUSE I CAN FIND PEACE
AND TRANQUILITY BY THE RIVER.
>>AS LATE AS THE 1960'S RIVER
BAPTISMS WERE QUITE COMMON
IN THE DELTA WITH GOSPEL
QUITE LITERALLY BEING SUNG
'DOWN BY THE RIVERSIDE' AND
THE FAITHFUL BEING CLEANSED
BY THE
MISSISSIPPI WATERS.
I WAS 12 YEARS OLD WHEN I GOT
BAPTIZED AND I GOT BAPTIZED
IN THE RIVER BECAUSE BACK THEN
THE CHURCHES, THE BUILDINGS
WHERE WE'D GO TO WORSHIP DIDN'T
HAVE POOLS LIKE WE HAVE NOW.
♪ BAPTIZE ME... ♪
>>BUT THESE DAYS, THE
MISSISSIPPI AND ITS SMALLER
CHANNELS ARE TOO POLLUTED
TO WASH AWAY ANYBODY'S SINS
AND SO REVEREND
SMITH'S CONGREGATION,
ALONG WITH MOST OF
THE OTHERS IN THE AREA,
HAVE HAD TO INSTALL A
PRIVATE POOL TO DO THE JOB.
JESUS WAS BAPTIZED
IN THE JORDAN RIVER.
IT WASN'T NO POOL,
BUT THROUGH THE YEARS
BACTERIA AND CONTAMINATION
AND EVERYTHING
STARTED FLOWING IN THE BAYOU
AND IT'S BECOME UNSAFE
FOR PEOPLE TO GET
BAPTIZED IN THE BAYOU NOW.
>>THE RIVER TODAY,
ALONG ITS ENTIRE LENGTH,
IS SHOWING
SIGNS OF DECLINE.
58 MILLION TONS OF TOXIC
DISCHARGE TRAVELS DOWN
THE MISSISSIPPI EVERY YEAR
WITH STRONG CLAIMS THAT
RIVER AND INDUSTRIAL POLLUTION
ARE DIRECTLY RESPONSIBLE
FOR MANY CANCER-RELATED
ILLNESSES EVERY YEAR.
THE MISSISSIPPI SERVES
AS THE PRIMARY SOURCE
OF WATER FOR 18
MILLION PEOPLE
BUT BECAUSE IT'S THE
POOR WHO HAVE TO DRINK IT,
NOTHING IS BEING DONE
TO ADDRESS THE PROBLEM.
REVEREND SMITH, HOWEVER,
STILL SEES A PURITY OF SPIRIT
IN THE TOXIC WATERS
OF THE MISSISSIPPI
AND TRIES TO FIND SOME
HOPE FOR HIS CONGREGATION,
MOST OF WHOM LIVE ON
LESS THAN TEN DOLLARS A DAY.
THE RIVER MEANS A
LOT TO THE GOSPEL.
I'M THINKING RIGHT NOW IN MY
CHURCH JUST HAVING A BOAT TRIP
WHERE I CAN GET EVERYBODY ON
THE WATER AND THAT WOULD BRING
PEACE AND TRANQUILITY TO
THEIR MIND BECAUSE THEY MAY BE
GOING THROUGH SOME ROUGH TIMES
IN THEIR LIVES BUT I KNOW THAT
ONCE I GET THEM ON THE WATER
AND START PREACHING THE GOSPEL
TO THEM AND START SINGING ZION
SONGS, GOSPEL MIXED WITH WATER
HAS THE TENDENCY OF BRINGING
TROUBLE DOWN IN YOUR LIFE.
YOU'VE GOT TO UNDERSTAND
IT'S ALL ABOUT JESUS.
I TOLD YA'LL LAST WEEK YOU OUGHT
TO HAVE SOME SHOUTING, YA'LL.
DON'T LOOK AT
NOBODY ELSE.
YOU OUGHT TO HAVE
YOUR OWN SHOUTING.
TELL HIM I'VE GOT
SOME SHOUT IN ME!
I'VE GOT SOME
SHOUT IN ME!
YOU GOT SOME
SHOUT IN YOU?
♪
THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER FLOWS
THROUGH TEN STATES WITH ITS
BASINS STRETCHING OUT
INTO 31 AMERICAN PROVINCES.
LOUISIANA IS THE LAST STATE IT
REACHES ON ITS WAY TO THE SEA
OF THE GULF OF MEXICO.
AND MUCH OF THIS REGION REMAINS
UNPOPULATED WITH THE EXCEPTION
OF WILDLIFE - SNAKES, ALLIGATORS
AND BLACK BEARS SHARE THIS SPACE
WITH ANOTHER
ENDANGERED SPECIES.
THE ACADIANS WERE A
GROUP OF FRENCH SETTLERS
WHO WERE EXPELLED FROM NOVA
SCOTIA BY THE BRITISH IN 1755
AND BEGAN ARRIVING IN
LOUISIANA TEN YEARS LATER.
250 YEARS ON AND
THEY'RE STILL HERE,
BETTER KNOWN
THESE DAYS AS CAJUNS.
BUTCH HERBERT IS
QUINTESSENTIALLY CAJUN.
HE STILL TRIES TO KEEP
THE OLD TRADITIONS ALIVE
BUT HE'S ONE OF
A DYING BREED.
I'M PROUD TO BE A CAJUN AND
I'M PROUD TO BE A LOUISIANAN.
I'M PROUD TO BE FROM
SOUTH LOUISIANA.
THE FURTHER SOUTH
YOU GO THE PROUDER I AM.
THAT'S MY HERITAGE.
I FEEL THAT WAY.
MY MOTHER COULDN'T SPEAK
FRENCH AND MY FATHER COULD
BUT HE COULDN'T TEACH HER SO
WE NEVER COULD SPEAK FRENCH.
WHEN I STARTED SCHOOL I WAS
FORBIDDEN TO SPEAK FRENCH.
YES, YOU COULDN'T SPEAK
FRENCH IN SCHOOL.
THAT'S HOW THEY WERE.
LIKE RIGHT NOW THEY'RE TRYING
TO BAN SPANISH AND I THINK
REALLY AND TRULY IF A PERSON CAN
BE BILINGUAL, HE'S BETTER OFF.
>>ONLY A VERY SMALL PERCENTAGE
OF CAJUNS STILL SPEAK FRENCH
BUT THEY KEEP THEIR HERITAGE
ALIVE IN OTHER WAYS
- THROUGH THEIR MUSIC
AND THEIR COOKING.
WHETHER YOU'RE MAKING
GUMBO OR JAMBALAYA,
SHRIMP SEEMS TO BE
THE MAIN INGREDIENT
IN MOST OF THE DISHES.
IT'S HARDLY SURPRISING
THAT FISHING FOR SHRIMPS
AROUND THE LOUISIANA
COASTLINE USED TO BE
A WAY OF LIFE AND A FAMILY
TRADITION FOR MANY.
BUT TODAY THE FISHING
INDUSTRY IS NETTING AN
EVER SMALLER CATCH WITH
MANY FISHERMEN HAVING TO
LOOK FOR WORK ON THE OIL
RIGS IN THE GULF OF MEXICO.
FOR THE DIEHARDS LIKE BUTCH
AND HIS 18-YEAR-OLD NEPHEW,
IT'S BECOMING
INCREASINGLY DIFFICULT
TO MAKE A LIVING
FROM SHRIMPING.
CHEAPER IMPORTED SHRIMP FROM
SOUTH AMERICA AND SOUTHEAST ASIA
HAVE GREATLY CUT INTO THE
LOCAL FISHERMAN'S MARKET.
FUEL IS ALSO BECOMING
MORE EXPENSIVE
AND POLLUTION IN THE
WATERWAYS IS TAKING ITS TOLL.
ALL THIS HAS CAUSED GREAT
RESENTMENT AMONGST THE CAJUNS
WHO FEEL EVEN MORE BITTER NOW
THAT A NEW WAVE OF IMMIGRATION
IS ADDING TO
THEIR PROBLEMS.
THEY COME FROM VIETNAM.
THEY'RE REFUGEES AND THE
UNITED STATES SUBSIDIZES THEM.
THE CATHOLIC RELIGION SUBSIDIZES
THEM, GIVE THEM MONEY,
GIVE THEM PLACES TO STAY,
GIVE THEM HOUSING, FOOD,
AND THEY HAVE A DISCOUNT
ON ALL OF THEIR EQUIPMENT.
I CAN'T COMPETE
WITH THE VIETNAMESE.
I CAN'T, BUT I DON'T
HOLD THAT AGAINST HIM.
I HOLD THAT AGAINST
OUR COUNTRY.
>>THE CAJUN WAY OF LIFE
MAY SOON BE LOST IN THE BAYS
AND BAYOUS OF LOUISIANA
WITH THE LEGACY LIVING ON
ONLY IN THE STORIES THAT
BUTCH AND OTHERS LIKE HIM
WILL TELL THEIR CHILDREN
AND GRANDCHILDREN.
THE CAJUN CULTURE
WON'T EXIST IN 50 YEARS.
I CAN'T HAND IT DOWN TO MY
GRANDKIDS AND THE SIMPLE
REASON IS BECAUSE
OF PROGRESS.
THAT'S WHAT THEY CALL PROGRESS.
THE SIMPLE REASON'S PROGRESS.
>>FIFTY MILES EAST OF BUTCH'S
HOME, THROUGH THE SWAMPY
WILDERNESS OF ITS BASIN, THE
MIGHTY MISSISSIPPI AGAIN BECOMES
AN URBAN RIVER FLOWING THICK AND
FAST INTO ITS LAST PORT OF CALL.
NEW ORLEANS IS A CITY WHICH
DOESN'T JUST LIE ON THE BANKS
OF THE RIVER BUT IS
LARGELY SURROUNDED BY IT.
IT IS HERE IN THE AFTERMATH OF
THE DEVASTATING STORMS OF 2005
THAT THE TRUE DIVISIONS
IN MODERN AMERICAN LIFE
BECAME
SHOCKINGLY CLEAR.
THIS OLD PORT IS STILL A
VIBRANT COLORFUL CITY
WITH MUSIC
AT ITS HEART.
AFTER SUFFERING ONE OF THE
WORST NATURAL DISASTERS
IN U.S. HISTORY, NEW ORLEANS IS
GAMELY GIVING THE IMPRESSION
THAT THE GOOD TIMES
ARE ROLLING AGAIN.
BUT A COUPLE OF MILES
TO THE NORTH OR EAST,
THE CAJUN BRAVURA
AND THE VOODOO SPELLS
FALL AWAY LIKE A
MARDI GRAS MASK,
THE STREETS FALL QUIET AND
THE CITY BECOMES A DEAD ZONE.
THIS IS THE NINTH WARD -
ONE OF THE LOWER LYING
AND CONSEQUENTLY
POORER PARTS OF TOWN.
MANY, PERHAPS MOST, OF THE
CITY'S DEAD CAME FROM HERE.
AS WAS THE CASE IN
THE FLOOD OF 1927,
THESE PEOPLE SIMPLY
HAD NO MEANS OF ESCAPE.
THE BODIES WERE WASHED
AWAY WITH THE FLOOD WATERS
OR LEFT TO ROT IN ATTICS,
WITH THE NUMBER OF DEAD
LATER FOUND HERE EERILY
RECORDED IN BLACK PAINT
ON THE CARCASSES
OF THEIR HOMES.
THE MEMBERS OF THE NEW
WAVE JAZZ BAND WERE BORN
AND BROUGHT
UP IN THE CITY.
JULIUS LEWIS REMEMBERS
HOW THINGS USED TO BE.
BEFORE KATRINA THIS PLACE
WAS ALIVE AND UP AND RUNNING.
THERE WAS PEOPLE EVERYWHERE,
BUSINESSES BOOMING
AND MOST PEOPLE DOWN
HERE OWNED THEIR HOUSES.
THEY WERE SMALL
BUT MOSTLY OWNED.
UNFORTUNATELY, THEY
DIDN'T HAVE INSURANCE
BUT IT WAS VERY BUSY AND
VERY LIVELY, VERY SPIRITED.
THEY HAD THEIR OWN TYPE
OF CULTURE DOWN HERE.
IT'S SO SAD TODAY
TO SEE IT THIS WAY
WITH NO HOUSES
AND NO PEOPLE.
>>ON THE 29TH OF AUGUST,
2005, AS HURRICANE KATRINA
PASSED TO THE EAST OF THE CITY,
THE FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM
IN NEW ORLEANS FAILED
IN 53 DIFFERENT PLACES
WITH NEARLY EVERY LEVEE IN
THE METRO AREA BREACHED.
PERCY ELLICE SR. WAS
LUCKY ENOUGH TO OWN A CAR
AND SO HE PILED IT HIGH WITH
AS MANY PEOPLE AS HE COULD
AND RACED
OUT OF THE CITY.
ONCE THE FLOOD HIT, I WENT OUT
TO THE COUNTRY AND TRIED NOT TO
LOOK AT THE TELEVISION
BECAUSE IT WAS TOO DEPRESSING
AND I KNEW EVENTUALLY I
WOULD HAVE TO COME BACK
AND FACE THE REALITY
THAT EVERYTHING WAS GONE
SO MY THOUGHTS WERE
BASICALLY ON REBUILDING
MY LIFE FROM SCRATCH
AND MAKING IT MUCH BETTER.
THE DISASTER PART, YOU
HAD TO PUT THAT BEHIND YOU
AND MOVE FORWARD.
YOU CAN'T DWELL ON IT
BECAUSE ALL THAT'LL DO
IS MAKE YOU DEPRESSED.
YOU GOT TO PICK UP AND
START OVER AND SAY, HEY,
GOD DOES EVERYTHING FOR
A REASON AND KEEP GOING.
GO WITH THE FLOW.
>>JULIUS HAD NO WAY OUT.
HE GOT TRAPPED IN THE CITY
AND WAS LUCKY TO
ESCAPE WITH HIS LIFE...
BUT HE LOST HIS HOME,
HIS FRIENDS AND HIS FAMILY.
LIKE MOST OF NEW
ORLEANS' MUSICIANS,
HE'S NOW RELOCATED IN ONE OF
THE OTHER TOWNS UPSTREAM
BUT COMES BACK TO
PLAY WITH HIS BAND.
TODAY, NEW ORLEANS IS
FIGHTING FOR ITS LIFE.
THE FLOOD KILLED
NEARLY 2,000 PEOPLE
AND WASHED
AWAY MANY MORE.
ONLY HALF OF ITS POPULATION
AND ITS MUSICIANS RETURNED
TO START REBUILDING
THEIR CITY AND THEIR LIVES.
IT'S A STRUGGLE BUT LIKE MANY OF
THE OTHER PLACES WE'VE SEEN
ALONG OUR JOURNEY, HOPE
LIVES ON HERE IN THE MINDS
AND HEARTS OF THOSE WHO HAVE
SUFFERED AND LOST THE MOST
AND IN THE MUSIC OF THE
YOUNGER GENERATION.
THE BELIEF ON THE STREETS
IS THAT IF THE MUSIC SURVIVES
THEN THE SPIRIT OF NEW
ORLEANS WILL LIVE ON.
MUSIC IS NEW ORLEANS.
WITHOUT MUSIC THERE'D
BE NO NEW ORLEANS.
THE TRADITION, THE BRASS, THE
JAZZ, THE SOUND, THE FLOW...
IT'S WHAT NEW
ORLEANS IS ALL ABOUT.
THE TRADITION
MUST GO ON.
YOU MUST PASS IT DOWN,
KEEP IT GOING, REGENERATE IT,
KEEP THE ENERGY
AND THE FIRE GOING.
THIS IS NEW ORLEANS.
NEW ORLEANS IS JAZZ.
WHEN YOU THINK OF JAZZ,
IT'S HERE THAT YOU'RE THINKING
ABOUT - NEW ORLEANS.
>>AND SO AS WE COME TO
THE END OF OUR JOURNEY
ALONG THE MISSISSIPPI AND
AS OL' MAN RIVER QUIETLY
RETIRES TO THE SEA
WEARY FROM THE CENTURIES
OF TRADE, TRAVEL, AND INJUSTICE
THAT HE HAS SEEN ALONG THE WAY,
IT IS THE MUSIC AND
THE SPIRIT OF THE PLACE
THAT WE TAKE WITH US; A
REMINDER THAT NO MATTER
HOW HARD THE STRUGGLE OR
HOW HARSH THE CONDITIONS,
THE TRUE SPIRIT OF
BOTH MAN AND THE RIVER
JUST KEEPS
ROLLING ALONG.